[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome.
I'm Dr. Robert J. Gilbert,
your host for this series.
In this episode,
we're going to explore
one of the most important
patterns in sacred geometry.
This pattern holds the secret of
creating a portal to the divine
through balancing
opposite polarities.
It also holds the key to one of
the most misunderstood topics
in all of spiritual science, how
to identify the different types
of spiritual beings
and influences
which we will all encounter
on the spiritual path.
This pattern will lead
us into hidden aspects
of the tree of
life, where we will
see that it has deep roots in
the ancient Egyptian temple
science.
You will then learn how to
activate in your energy field
a key part of the
grid of life design,
or GOLD, which can
transform your life
and your spiritual destiny.
So what is this sacred geometry
pattern I've been referring to?
It is the form known classically
as the vesica piscis,
and today is better known
as the vesica pisces.
It is called the vesica
pisces because it
is the origin of the fish
symbol of Christianity, which
is called the
ichthys, with Pisces
being the sign of the
fish in the Zodiac.
Christianity developed
as a major religion
during the Age of
Pisces, when the sun
rises on the vernal equinox,
the first day of spring,
in front of the
constellation Pisces.
In previous
episodes, we explored
how the circle
and the sphere are
the primordial perfect forms
for containing new life.
The egg in a human
mother's womb is a sphere
which, upon
fertilization, becomes
the primordial container of the
new living human being, coming
from spirit into
the physical world.
Within embryology are keys
to many secrets of creation.
When fertilized, the egg
will divide into two.
This is the recreation,
with every living being,
of the original
primordial movement
from the unified
field of the divine
into the manifested world,
through polarity and duality.
The movement from divine unity
into physical manifestation
through duality is one key
part of the pact thought
form in the mind of God, which
manifests as the vesica pisces.
There's a very important
spiritual reason
for this movement from unity
to duality and polarity.
That is that duality
creates movement,
such as the attraction and
repulsion between polarities
and magnets, or the
flow of electrons
in electrical systems.
Only through the reunion
of opposite polarities
does new life come
into the world.
Another important divine thought
form behind the vesica pisces
is that it is a
spiritual portal.
The almond-shaped
vesica pisces portal
is formed whenever there is a
perfect connection between two
circles or spheres holding
opposite complementary
energies, between yin
and yang, hot and cold,
masculine and feminine,
light and dark.
The perfect divine
union of the two
occurs when the outer physical
boundary of each circle
connects to the divine center
of its complementary circle.
Then, between these two centers,
the almond-shaped vesica portal
appears.
This is the portal
between the worlds.
This opening up of a spiritual
portal to higher energies
is not simply an
abstract philosophy.
It's linked to modern science
and ongoing new energy
research.
These magnetic and electrical
polarity movements of energy
are the foundation of all
of our modern technology.
We even see the vesica oval form
being created in magnetic field
lines.
Note that this vesica
form in the field lines
only appears when two opposite
polarities are adjacent
and attracting, not when
two similar polarities
are adjacent and repelling.
Modern cutting-edge research
into scalar energies
indicates that it is possible
to generate more energy
in a physical system than
is contained originally
in the physical components
through creating
a gating effect, which brings
in energy from somewhere
outside of our
three-dimensional system.
One of the ways
which has been found
to create these unusual
energy gating effects
is to buck two opposing
electrical currents together,
creating an opening to
higher-dimensional scalar
energy.
This is seen in scalar and
zero point technology circuit
designs.
The interaction of
these two energy fields
when they come
together into a center
is postulated to open
up a hyperspace portal
beyond the
three-dimensional world.
This concept is directly
related to the interactions
of two opposite-polarity energy
fields in the overlapping
circles, the boundary
of each one touching
the center of the other
circle, creating the unity
portal of the vesica
in their interaction.
Another aspect of
the vesica pattern
is that it can be extended
into a larger net,
popularized in modern
times under the name
the flower of life to describe
the net created by overlapping
circles which then
manifest multiple vesicas,
which look like flower
petals in the design.
The term flower of life is a
recent name for this pattern.
It had other names
in the ancient world.
Sacred geometry expert
Keith Critchlow from Britain
has commented that this
ancient pattern should not
be called the flower of
life, but rather is better
termed the flower of creation.
This is because it holds a
six-sided hexagonal pattern
related to crystal and mineral
forms of physical creation,
whereas life is related to
five-fold pentagonal forms
and the golden mean proportion.
The movement of the vesica
from duality into multiplicity,
as in the flower pattern, is
the sacred geometry archetype
for the same process
in biological life.
We see this when the single
fertilized egg divides
into two, and then into
four, then into eight, then
continues this binary process
into higher multiplicity.
This exact same pattern of
unity to duality to multiplicity
is also found in the important
pattern of the Chinese "I
Ching," which is the same
pattern found in modern binary
computer technology, and in the
biological structure of the DNA
human genetic code.
The "I Ching" is called
The Book of Changes.
It shows how a series
of 64 hexagrams
reveals every
possible change which
can occur in any situation
or in any living system.
From the original unity, the
Wuji, the original circle
or sphere of creation,
a split into two
occurs, creating yin and yang.
These two then divide themselves
into two again, making four,
then divide again to become
eight, then 16, then 32, then
64.
This is the divine thought form
behind the creation of the 64
hexagrams of the "I Ching."
The first split from 1 to 2
creates the primordial yin
and yang polarity, then
the split from 2 to 4
creates the bigrams
of the "I Ching,"
then the split from 4 to
8 creates the trigrams,
continuing through
the progression
until the 32 splits into the
64 hexagrams of the "I Ching."
Modern genetic
scientists discovered
that the exact
same coding system
as found in the "I Ching"
stands behind our human DNA,
creating the 64 codons of
the human genetic code.
The vesica portal
from the divine
to physical manifestation was
often used in sacred design,
often without always showing its
source in the perfect overlap
of two complementary circles.
Modern analyses of stone
circles from megalithic Europe
show that the vesica pisces
was the basis for laying out
many classic stone circles.
We find the vesica
in the patterns
for laying out a temple or
creating a sacred mandala
all around the world.
We find it in the
Holy Grail tradition,
on the lid of Chalice Well
in Glastonbury, England.
We find it in the design for
the concentric vesica portals
into the holy interiors
of cathedrals.
When seen in cathedral portals,
the concentric vesicles
often have their bottom part
cut off for design purposes.
Spiritual beings who hold the
perfect balance between heaven,
the divine source, and Earth,
physical manifestation,
are shown inside the vesica.
In the West, the
Christ being is often
shown inside the vesica pisces.
Now that we have some essential
knowledge about the vesica,
we can explore how this
pattern holds a key
to two of the most
important mysteries
of spiritual initiation.
The first mystery
is how to discern
the nature of different
nonphysical beings
we will encounter on
the spiritual path
so that we are not led astray.
The second mystery is how the
same vesica pattern actually
manifests in the human energy
field as a key sacred geometry
grid, which we can
activate to accelerate
our spiritual development and
optimize our spiritual destiny.
Let's go into a deep dive,
now, into the first mystery.
Spiritual seekers must
develop deep discernment
between spiritual
beings of a beneficial
versus a harmful
nature, particularly
when those harmful beings
often present themselves
as being benevolent.
This discernment also can
give us powerful insight
into how other people's thoughts
and actions are influenced
by these different types
of spiritual beings, who
have been spoken of
in esoteric traditions
for many thousands of years.
Unfortunately, one consequence
of modern materialism
is that our culture has very
little understanding anymore
of the real nonphysical
beings and processes
spoken of in earlier traditions.
We dismiss these often as
myths, metaphors, or symbolism,
not spiritual realities.
The European Rosicrucians used
the phrase "occult materialism"
to describe how we
distort higher realities
into materialistic
thought forms, which
are based on physical
plane conditions,
not on the realities
of higher planes.
A simple example is thinking
that beings on higher planes
look like human beings,
that they communicate
through earthly languages,
that they are solid
and take up physical space,
rather than understanding
the true nonphysical,
highly dynamic,
interpenetrating nature
of beings on higher plane.
Occult materialism is the
consequence of our culture
having lost our understanding
of multidimensional reality,
of the exact nature of
higher planes of existence.
Using our seven-plane
model, we can
explore how the pattern
and principle of the vesica
pisces guides us on
different planes.
The divine thought form
of the vesica pattern
teaches us, on the physical,
vitality, and emotional plane
levels, that we must
balance opposite polarities
and be centered in
order to achieve health
and inner balance, just
as the Chinese medicine
tradition understands that
an excess of yin or yang
creates illness.
On the mental plane, the
vessel becomes the concept
of good being in the
middle between two
opposite unbalanced polarities,
not a simple polarity
between good and evil.
Only by understanding that good
is the center between extremes
can we then discern where
these polarized imbalances are
manifesting dangerously so
we can protect ourselves.
We can find these dangerously
unbalanced tendencies
in ourselves, in the
people around us,
in distorted
metaphysical information,
in unhealthy trends in modern
politics and culture, et
cetera.
On the causal
plane, our karma is
determined by how
skillfully or unskillfully
we apply the vesica balance
principles to our actions
in the world which help or
harm ourselves and others.
On the spiritual plane, the
two unbalanced polarities
and the balanced center
manifest as groups
of real nonphysical
spiritual beings who
manifest these tendencies
in their inner nature
and in their influences
on human beings.
We can see that the
spiritual plane itself
is a very high plane of
existence, where things we
think of as symbols or metaphors
in our materialistic culture
actually manifest from
the highest divine
plane as real nonphysical
spiritual beings.
We have lost so
much understanding
of the spiritual plane
and spiritual beings.
We are like fish who are
terrified of seeing the water
we are immersed in,
and so we pretend
that the spiritual realities
all around us don't exist.
However, the activation
of our latent organs
of spiritual perception
must happen gradually,
in tandem with
having a healthy body
and a healthy structure of
our physical life on Earth
in order to remain
grounded and rational
in the midst of perceiving
these higher realities.
The great Rosicrucian
initiate Rudolf Steiner once
commented that higher
levels of clairvoyance
are almost like a type
of controlled psychosis,
requiring tremendous
inner discipline
and grounding in
the physical world
to be able to stay
healthy and to integrate
nonphysical perceptions
properly into a person's psyche.
Mental hospitals
are full of people
whose spiritual organs
of nonphysical perception
opened up prematurely, making
them unable to properly
navigate between
physical reality
and perceptions of nonphysical
beings and processes
which are perceived in a
distorted and unhealthy way.
This distorted perception
of spiritual realities,
combined with lack of proper
grounding in the physical body,
creates reactions on the mental
and emotional planes which
lead to psychological illness.
So it is very important
that we really understand
the nature of higher
realities and ground this
in a healthy, balanced
life in the physical body
in order to safely and
effectively open up
these vitally needed new subtle
organs of perception which
can accurately perceive
higher realities.
A key teaching of
multiple world traditions
is that every human
being has a divine spirit
core, a flame from the ocean of
fire that is the Godhead, just
is the Christ does.
The early teaching of
the Christian church,
found in the book called
"On First Principles,"
written by Origen in
Alexandria, Egypt,
around 1,800 years ago
is that the Christ being
is the Godhead reduced
in scale to a level where
human beings can see and
interact with this being.
Human beings also have
the same divine essence,
but we are reduced
in scale of one step
further to the
microcosmic level.
Every human being incarnates
as a young spiritual
being into the
physical plane in order
to develop experience,
knowledge, wisdom, compassion,
and independence, balanced
with the capacity for love
and service.
We can activate
the divine powers
which slumber within
us once we reach
the maturity needed to use these
powers to help and not to harm
others.
One of the most
important teachings
in all of spiritual science
is the Buddhist teaching
of the vesica
principle, once again,
that evil is not an
opposite polarity to good.
Good is always the middle
way, the perfect balance
point between complementary
opposite extremes.
Our physical, psychological,
and spiritual health
relies on cultivating
the central balance
point, the vesica, between
opposite unbalanced extremes.
The ancient Greek
teaching from Plato
is that the world's
soul is crucified
on the cross of the
physical world, which
is based on the cubical cross
of the three 90-degree axes that
create physical space.
Every human being is a
microcosm of the world's soul.
We are all crucified within
the cross of the physical body.
When we incarnate from spirit
into our dense material body,
this is an experience we
all carry subconsciously
within ourselves as a
crucifixion experience,
being trapped in the cross
of the physical body.
This opens us up to
potentially great suffering
in the body of flesh and bone,
which is our cross to bear.
This is why every
incarnating human
being is on a hero's
journey in order
to go through the experiences
we need on the physical plane
to actualize our full
spiritual potential.
The European Rosicrucians
see Christ as a divine being,
the being of the
sun, the solar logos,
incarnated into a human
body in the physical world
as an act of solidarity
with humanity.
This is why European
Rosicrucians call
the Christ being the
representative of humanity,
and call the
spiritual significance
of Christ's crucifixion
between the two thieves
the mystery of Golgotha.
The divine thought
form in the mind
of God behind this
mystery drama of Christ
crucified between two thieves
is that the two side crosses are
within the opposite circles
of the vesica pisces,
with the Christ held in
the center of the vesica
of perfect balance,
and holding open
the spiritual portal between
the opposite polarities.
The two thieves on
either side of Christ
are described in the
esoteric tradition
as having two
opposite qualities.
The thief on the
left side cross is
full of unbalanced spirituality.
The thief on the
right side cross
has been consumed by
unbalanced materialism.
This left side thief
is the representative
of a particular group of
spiritual beings known
to the Western tradition under
the name of their leader,
Lucifer, meaning light bearer.
These spiritual beings
do not understand
the purpose of
physical incarnation
for humanity and the
suffering it brings.
The influence of
these beings attracts
us to unbalanced forms
of illusory, one-sided
spirituality, which can
manifest in many different ways.
In some cases, it takes the form
of seeking constant ecstatic
states and avoiding
painful or difficult
day-to-day physical
realities, which
can lead to uncontrolled
substance abuse.
The Luciferic beings
do not understand
the purpose of physical
incarnation in a balanced way,
and do not understand
that human beings can only
go through the
stages of development
we need through a series
of physical incarnations.
However, these
Luciferic beings, with
their one-sided spirituality,
are believed in the rosicrucian
tradition to be
redeemable if they
come to understand the
purpose of physical life,
to balance physical life
with spiritual development.
The thief on the right-hand
side, on the other hand,
turns his head away
from the Christ,
refusing to acknowledge
the principle of balance.
This thief manifests
another important group
known to the esoteric
tradition, who
are the opposite
polarity to Lucifer's
unbalanced spirituality.
These beings embody
unbalanced materialism,
encouraging human beings to
focus only on physical life,
to deny and even ridicule
the existence of spirit
and all higher
meaning or purpose.
These beings encourage
humanity to see ourselves
as an accidental result
of purely random material
chemicals, with no moral
code beyond serving
our own selfish interest,
regardless of the harm
we do to others.
These spiritual
beings, of course,
know that spirit
exists, but they
have fallen in love with
matter and the physical world.
In the deep esoteric
tradition, it
is understood that these
nonphysical beings are much
more ancient than human beings.
They played a major role in
the process of crystallizing
the divine sacred
geometry thought forms
from the mind of God into
the forms of physical matter.
In this process,
they became obsessed
with matter and
the physical world,
which they feel they created
and they now desire to control.
Their subtle psychological
influence on human beings
has increased
significantly on the Earth
in recent times, which we
see mirrored historically
in the extreme materialism which
has overtaken modern culture.
On a personal level,
these materialistic beings
seek to influence
human beings to reject
all thoughts of unity,
compassion, love, metaphysics,
and spirituality,
and to act only out
of materialistic self-interest.
The spiritual beings
which encourage
this unbalanced materiality were
known in the ancient Persian
Zoroastrian tradition
through the name
of their leader, Ahriman.
This Zoroastrian tradition,
long before the advent
of Christianity, described
the Redeemer being,
our true spiritual
guide, as Ahura Mazda,
meaning the spiritual being
seen in the aura of the sun.
The Egyptian tradition
knew the being
which the Persians
called Ahriman
by the name Set, the adversary.
When Moses led the
Exodus from Egypt,
Set became the
Hebrew word Ha-Satan,
meaning the adversary.
The Jewish tradition
saw Ha-Satan
as the being which prevents us
from connecting to the divine.
In later Europe, the Hebrew term
Ha-Satan became simply Satan.
Most of the Western tradition
lost the major distinction
between Lucifer and
Satan, thinking them
the same being, which is full
of logical contradictions.
Lucifer's name
means light bearer,
a great spiritual being
of brilliant light
from the heavens.
Ahriman, or Satan, is shown
completely differently,
as a sclerotic figure
who dwells in darkness
deep inside the Earth.
Lucifer and Ahriman
are polar opposites
in the esoteric tradition,
not the same being.
However, both
beings can blind us
to the middle way
of the Christos.
This image of Christ crucified
between the two thieves,
holding the balance
between the twin extremes
of unbalanced spirituality
and materialism,
it is the vesica
principle made flesh,
with the two thieves on
either side of the Christ
in the middle.
Opposite polarity
pillars to either side
with a perfect
middle pillar holding
the balance in the center
is also the sacred geometry
pattern from the
mind of God, which
is the key to unlocking hidden
powers in the human energy
body.
This pattern is best known
today through the tree of life
from the Jewish Kabbalah.
However, what is
not well known today
is that this pattern
was also activated
in secret practices in ancient
Egypt and among the Essenes.
The tree of life's net pattern
is based on three pillars.
Only the middle pillar
goes all the way up
to heaven and down to Earth.
The two side pillars do not
reach all the way up or down.
In the Jewish Kabbalah,
the side pillars
are known as the pillars
of mercy and severity,
complementary opposites balanced
by the harmonizing middle
pillar.
It has almost been forgotten
today that the tree of life
also holds a hidden encoding
of the geometric movement
from the zero-dimensional
divine plane
to our three-dimensional
physical world.
The topmost center, keter, which
connects to the divine source,
is the zero-dimensional
single point.
Then the next two centers
create the one-dimensional line.
The next three centers
create the triangle,
the simplest two-dimensional
form made with straight lines.
And the final four centers
create the tetrahedron,
the simplest three-dimensional
form made with straight lines.
This is how the movement
from zero to three dimensions
is sacred geometrically
encoded into the tree of life.
It is rarely understood
today that the tree of life
is based on the vesica
sacred geometry pattern,
nor how exactly the tree of
life appears in the human energy
field.
Nor is it understood the
methods through which
its power can be activated.
There are hints of
the secret teaching
that the tree of life
pattern is holographic,
appearing both as a
glyph of cosmic creation
and also microcosmically
appearing
inside the human body.
One such hint is in the
name of the highest energy
center on the tree of life
being called keter in Hebrew.
Keter means crown,
indicating to the initiate
that this is the first energy
center directly above the top
of the human head.
Because the ancient practices
for activating the tree of life
in the human energy field
were kept very secret,
in modern times, there have
been different theories
of where the energy
centers on the tree of life
correspond to in the human body.
For example, the best known
modern metaphysical model,
coming from the English
Golden Dawn system,
is that the lowest, most
materialized center of malchut
corresponds to the energy
center at the base of our feet.
However, in the 1980s, a
great Greek Christian hermetic
initiate became revealed to
the public under the name
of Daskalos, a Greek
term meaning teacher.
Daskalos was known for
incredibly advanced
spiritual abilities.
For example, he fully remembered
all of his past incarnations,
and he could read, write, and
speak all of the languages
that he knew from
previous lives,
including ancient
Egyptian hieroglyphs.
Daskalos was asked
how he developed
his incredible
abilities, and he said
they were the
result of practices
he learned as a heirophont
in ancient Egypt.
This practice was with the
original Egyptian version
of the tree of life
that he referred
to as the symbol of life,
which predates and was
the source for the later tree
of life in the Jewish Kabbalah.
Daskalos then published a book
with lost knowledge regarding
the symbol of life,
which included
Egyptian hieroglyphic
text related to activating
the symbol in the human energy
field, which he remembered
from his ancient
Egyptian lifetime.
Daskalos corrected the error in
modern metaphysical practices
with the tree of life,
showing that the lowest energy
center on this powerful
sacred geometry pattern
is, in reality,
over the genitals
and the base of the
abdomen, not at the feet.
We will, in this
series, refer to
this powerful sacred geometry
grid in the human energy field
as the grid of life
design, or referred to
in short by the acronym GOLD.
This GOLD pattern manifests the
vesica principle in our energy
field, with the two circles
to either side becoming
the polarized left
and right pillars
and the vesica perfect
balance portal becoming
the middle pillar.
The three pillars
in our energy field
are based on the same vesica
sacred geometry principle
as the three crosses at
the mystery of Golgotha.
In Episode 1, we
constructed the first part
of the grid of life
design, which is the Golden
Triangle around the head.
This started with the
first energy center
above the head, which is where
the divine energy above us
enters into our middle
pillar, the ultimate energy
channel in the human
body, which runs straight
down the midline of our
body from the crown chakra
to the perineum at the
base of the abdomen.
This first energy center at
the top of the middle pillar
we then connected to the
little known energy centers
above each shoulder, at the top
of the left and right pillars
in our energy field, creating
a golden triangle of energy
around our physical head.
This golden triangle created
between the highest energy
centers of our metal pillar
and our left and right pillars
holds our head and consciousness
inside a divine golden light.
We can now add the next
part of the pattern,
moving from the golden
triangle around our head
to activating the section of
this pattern around our heart.
We will also build on some
of the skills and concepts
you learned in previous
episodes, particularly
the zero point centering
and radiance methods.
We will use these techniques
to more powerfully
activate each energy
center in this pattern
by moving dynamically into the
very epicenter of that energy
center and then radiating
its activated energy
outwards like a sun.
There are multiple
methods for activating
the structures of the
grid of life design
in your energy field.
We will use a
simplified method which
activates first the center in
your middle pillar for balance
and then activates
its connections
to the left and right pillars.
If you'd like to do
the practice now,
please see the companion
video for this episode.
Otherwise, please
set an intention
to come back and do the
practice at a later time.
We will complete the grid of
life design in your energy
field in a later episode by
adding in the two final centers
on the middle pillar,
which will ground us
into physical incarnation
and link us to the Earth.
In secret teachings from
Egypt, Israel, the Essenes,
and early Christianity,
the activation
of the grid of life in
the human energy field
was understood to
be one of the most
powerful and destiny-changing
practices in all
of spiritual and
vibrational science.
I hope that in this episode, you
have learned why the vesica is
such an essential sacred
geometry pattern, so much
so that I named my
research and teaching
organization The Vesica
Institute for Holistic Studies.
Please join me for
our next episode, when
we will explore the sacred
geometry secrets which
make it possible for
our spirit to incarnate
into a physical
body, and you will
learn to activate an
almost forgotten pattern
essential for your merkaba,
the body of soul travel.
I'll see you then.